src/content/projects/emoji.mdx, before:

---
author: Kai Magnus Müller
pubDatetime: 2018-02-02T15:22:00Z
title: OpenMoji
highlight: true
draft: false
tags:
    - university project
    - featured
ogImage: ''
semesterDate: Winter 2017
course: OpenMoji
description: A special course by Benjamin Groß
---

import { Image, Picture } from '@astrojs/image/components';
import Figure from '@components/Figure.astro';
import Video from '@components/Video.svelte';
import UseCase from '@components/UseCase.svelte';

<div style="" class="openmoji-iframe">
	<iframe
		src="https://www.openmoji.org/library/"
		frameborder="0"
		style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%; border:1px solid var(--color-text); background:white"></iframe>
</div>

Visit the [OpenMoji Library](https://www.openmoji.org/library/)

## Introduction

Why is the design of new emoji left to tech giants?
Emoji break language barriers and make communication of emotions more efficient and have become an important part of our daily communication worldwide. Too important to be left out of their users hands. OpenMoji is an open source emoji library and an attempt to democratize emoji. Everyone is invited to submit new emoji and improve the library.

## Project

At its core, the course titled "Open Source / Emoji" is a lesson in iconography and collaboration. At first simple pixel icons resembling the original emoji drawn by Shigetaka Kurita[^1] were created with focus on the essential features of objects. Gradually, additional elements were introduced and the icons got more complex. After each iteration we got together to discuss our icons and decisions.

<Figure
	alt="Drawing pixel icons sharpens perception of the most essential parts of objects. Next up: black and white vector icons with less restrictions on dimensions and vector icons with color. To the right the official light bulb emoji adhering to our style guide. (Not created by me.)"
	src="https://res.cloudinary.com/dm3a0qioc/image/upload/v1678049688/emoji-stages-2_xczbpp.png"
	aspectRatio="2880:720"></Figure>

## Style Guide

At this point we started our work on the OpenMoji library. To account for the amount of students involved and the size of our planned library a common style guide was needed to make sure all emoji fit together visually. The best emoji out of everything we created so far were selected. And a style guide team was founded to develop a common style guide together with our professors.

## Collaboration

Apart from our style guide many other things had to be prepared in order for this project to succeed. Other teams were tasked to gather a list of emoji to be included, create use cases and demos, develop a social media presence, create our project website, font creation and backend tech.

Additionally, every student was to create a block of emoji once the list was finalized. Which meant every student had weekly meetings with a member of the style guide team as well.

## Process

This project was different than most other courses. Instead of each team working on independent projects, here all teams were responsible for a smaller part of our bigger project. This meant communication and coordination - not just in each team - but also between teams was more important than ever.

At times challenging and chaotic, with the guidance from our supervising professors the project was completed and successfully released.

My focus – apart from designing my set of emoji – was on sketching concepts for our website and doing backend work regarding SVG exporting and resizing.

## About

This student project was created during winter semester 2017/18 as part of the Open Source / Emoji course by [Daniel Utz](http://www.danielutz.de) and [Benedikt Groß](http://benedikt-gross.de) with

[Sofie Ascherl](https://www.behance.net/sofieasche36e2)  
Jose Avila  
[Ronja Baeurlen](https://ronjabaeurlen.myportfolio.com)  
[Selina Bauder](http://selinabauder.de)  
Vanessa Boutzikoudi  
Rana Cakir  
Baris Camli  
Julian Grüneberg  
Laura Humpfer  
Emily Jäger  
[Hilda Kalyoncu](http://hilda-kalyoncu.de)  
[Jonas Rossner](http://info.jonasrossner.de/)  
[Marius Schnabel](http://marius-schnabel.de/)  
Lisa Schulz  
[Sina Schulz](http://www.skschulz.com)  
Mariella Steeb  
[Lisa Thiel](https://lisathiel.wixsite.com/portfolio)  
[Miriam Vollmeier](http://www.miriamvollmeier.com)  
[Kai Wanschura](http://www.kaiwanschura.de)  
[Johanna Wellnitz](http://johannawellnitz.de)  
[Martin Wehl](http://martinwehl.de)

Featured on the [Page Blog](https://page-online.de/kreation/sollte-man-das-design-von-emojis-google-apple-co-ueberlassen/).

[^1]: https://www.moma.org/collection/works/196070

Commit message:

Update branch from main (#22)
* Update index hero text (#11)

* Update index hero text

* Text adjustments

* text adjustments

* Update text

- remove plugin mentions for now

* 5 explore styling options for mobile (#13)

* Adjust figure margins after headings

* Increase heading margin top

* 6 update readme (#14)

* Update README.md

* Update README.md

* Misc improvements (#20)

* Add favicon.ico, fix font caching

* Update ordering

* Move font styles to head

* Move font to extra stylesheet

* Add vercel config

* Update vercel.json

* Revert "Update ordering"

This reverts commit 57baf3e86e09bfec4bcb6b2967568dfa855829c1.

Revert move fonts css to another fila and create vercel config

* Revert "Revert "Update ordering""

This reverts commit 0a00cd5c7876e827c3286862da3886b1b1564bca.

* Revert "Update vercel.json"

This reverts commit 87a1d11ec876787002ceeb407845e9b12e90724c.

* Revert "Add vercel config"

This reverts commit d406ec14d119cbf64c1a1bba0d751fe9f031f253.

* Revert "Move font to extra stylesheet"

This reverts commit 91b7eb3aed706cf229dd93bc568058d9c8f9bd05.

* Revert inline css, fix links

* Add site title and post description props

- Add site title and post description props to layouts, update according to project/post content
- Update emoji description

* 8 add names to anchor links mobile css (#21)

* Improve CollectionList

- Improve collection lists mobile css
- Improve line-height definitions

* Minor line-height adjustments

* Add name to link

* Wording changes

* Add eager loading to above the fold images

* Testing image instead of picture component

* Revert to picture and improve largest img size

src/content/projects/emoji.mdx, after:

---
author: Kai Magnus Müller
pubDatetime: 2018-02-02T15:22:00Z
title: OpenMoji
highlight: true
draft: false
tags:
    - university project
    - featured
ogImage: ''
semesterDate: Winter 2017
course: OpenMoji
description: A special course by Benjamin Groß and Daniel Utz. During this course, students developed an understanding for iconography, a set of design guidelines for emoji and finally, a set of independent emoji – the OpenMoji library.
---

import { Image, Picture } from '@astrojs/image/components';
import Figure from '@components/Figure.astro';
import Video from '@components/Video.svelte';
import UseCase from '@components/UseCase.svelte';

<div style="" class="openmoji-iframe">
	<iframe
		src="https://www.openmoji.org/library/"
		frameborder="0"
		style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%; border:1px solid var(--color-text); background:white"></iframe>
</div>

Visit the [OpenMoji Library](https://www.openmoji.org/library/)

## Introduction

Why is the design of new emoji left to tech giants?
Emoji break language barriers and make communication of emotions more efficient and have become an important part of our daily communication worldwide. Too important to be left out of their users hands. OpenMoji is an open source emoji library and an attempt to democratize emoji. Everyone is invited to submit new emoji and improve the library.

## Project

At its core, the course titled "Open Source / Emoji" is a lesson in iconography and collaboration. At first simple pixel icons resembling the original emoji drawn by Shigetaka Kurita[^1] were created with focus on the essential features of objects. Gradually, additional elements were introduced and the icons got more complex. After each iteration we got together to discuss our icons and decisions.

<Figure
	alt="Drawing pixel icons sharpens perception of the most essential parts of objects. Next up: black and white vector icons with less restrictions on dimensions and vector icons with color. To the right the official light bulb emoji adhering to our style guide. (Not created by me.)"
	src="https://res.cloudinary.com/dm3a0qioc/image/upload/v1678049688/emoji-stages-2_xczbpp.png"
	aspectRatio="2880:720"></Figure>

## Style Guide

At this point we started our work on the OpenMoji library. To account for the amount of students involved and the size of our planned library a common style guide was needed to make sure all emoji fit together visually. The best emoji out of everything we created so far were selected. And a style guide team was founded to develop a common style guide together with our professors.

## Collaboration

Apart from our style guide many other things had to be prepared in order for this project to succeed. Other teams were tasked to gather a list of emoji to be included, create use cases and demos, develop a social media presence, create our project website, font creation and backend tech.

Additionally, every student was to create a block of emoji once the list was finalized. Which meant every student had weekly meetings with a member of the style guide team as well.

## Process

This project was different than most other courses. Instead of each team working on independent projects, here all teams were responsible for a smaller part of our bigger project. This meant communication and coordination - not just in each team - but also between teams was more important than ever.

At times challenging and chaotic, with the guidance from our supervising professors the project was completed and successfully released.

My focus – apart from designing my set of emoji – was on sketching concepts for our website and doing backend work regarding SVG exporting and resizing.

## About

This student project was created during winter semester 2017/18 as part of the Open Source / Emoji course by [Daniel Utz](http://www.danielutz.de) and [Benedikt Groß](http://benedikt-gross.de) with

[Sofie Ascherl](https://www.behance.net/sofieasche36e2)  
Jose Avila  
[Ronja Baeurlen](https://ronjabaeurlen.myportfolio.com)  
[Selina Bauder](http://selinabauder.de)  
Vanessa Boutzikoudi  
Rana Cakir  
Baris Camli  
Julian Grüneberg  
Laura Humpfer  
Emily Jäger  
[Hilda Kalyoncu](http://hilda-kalyoncu.de)  
[Jonas Rossner](http://info.jonasrossner.de/)  
[Marius Schnabel](http://marius-schnabel.de/)  
Lisa Schulz  
[Sina Schulz](http://www.skschulz.com)  
Mariella Steeb  
[Lisa Thiel](https://lisathiel.wixsite.com/portfolio)  
[Miriam Vollmeier](http://www.miriamvollmeier.com)  
[Kai Wanschura](http://www.kaiwanschura.de)  
[Johanna Wellnitz](http://johannawellnitz.de)  
[Martin Wehl](http://martinwehl.de)

Featured on the [Page Blog](https://page-online.de/kreation/sollte-man-das-design-von-emojis-google-apple-co-ueberlassen/).

[^1]: https://www.moma.org/collection/works/196070
